PART ONE
I
All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
Everything was mixed up in the Oblonskys' house.
The wife found out that her husband was in connection with a French governess who was in their house, and announced to her husband that she could not live with him in the same house.
This situation continued for the third day and was painfully felt by the spouses themselves, and by all members of the family, and household members.
All members of the family and members of the household felt that there was no point in their cohabitation and that at every inn people who happened to meet were more connected to each other than they, the members of the Oblonsky family and members of the household.
The wife did not leave her rooms, the husband was not at home for the third day.
The children ran all over the house like they were lost; the Englishwoman quarreled with the housekeeper and wrote a note to a friend, asking her to find a new place for her; the cook left the yard yesterday, during dinner itself; the black cook and the coachman asked for a calculation.
On the third day after the quarrel, Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch Oblonsky - Stiva, as he was called in the world - at the usual hour, that is, at eight o'clock in the morning, woke up not in his wife's bedroom, but in his study, on a morocco sofa.
He turned his full, well-groomed body on the sofa springs, as if wishing to fall asleep again for a long time, on the other hand tightly hugged the pillow and pressed his cheek against it; but suddenly he jumped up, sat down on the sofa and opened his eyes.
“Yes, yes, how was it?
he thought, remembering the dream.
— Yes, how was it?
Yes!
Alabin gave dinner in Darmstadt; no, not in Darmstadt, but something American.
Yes, but there Darmstadt was in America.
Yes, Alabin gave dinner on glass tables, yes, and the tables sang: Il mio tesoro 1 and not Il mio tesoro, but something better, and some small decanters, and they are women, ”he recalled.
Stepan Arkadyevitch's eyes gleamed merrily, and he fell into thought, smiling.
“Yes, it was good, very good.
There was a lot of something else that was excellent, but you can’t say it in words and thoughts, you can’t even express it in reality. ”
And, noticing a streak of light breaking through the side of one of the cloth curtains, he cheerfully kicked his legs off the sofa, found with them the shoes embroidered by his wife (a birthday present last year), trimmed in golden morocco, and, according to an old, nine-year-old habit, without getting up, reached out his hand to the place where he had a bathrobe hanging in the bedroom.
And then he suddenly remembered how and why he was sleeping not in his wife's bedroom, but in the study; the smile vanished from his face, he wrinkled his brow.
"Ah, ah, ah!
Ahh! .. ”he mumbled, remembering everything that happened.
And again all the details of the quarrel with his wife presented themselves to his imagination, all the hopelessness of his situation and, most painful of all, his own guilt.
"Yes!
She will not forgive and cannot forgive.
And the worst thing of all is that I am to blame for everything, I am to blame, and not to blame.
That's the drama, he thought.
“Ah, ah, ah!” he would say in despair, recalling the most difficult impressions for himself from this quarrel.
Most unpleasant of all was that first minute, when, returning from the theatre, cheerful and contented, with a huge pear for his wife in his hand, he did not find his wife in the drawing room; to his surprise, he did not find her in the study, and finally saw her in the bedroom with an unfortunate note in her hand that opened everything.
She, that ever preoccupied, and busy, and narrow-minded, as he considered her, Dolly, sat motionless with a note in her hand and looked at him with an expression of horror, despair and anger.
- What is it?
it?
she asked, pointing to the note.
And at this recollection, as often happens, Stepan Arkadyevitch was tormented not so much by the event itself as by the way he answered these words of his wife.
What happened to him at that moment is what happens to people when they are suddenly convicted of something too shameful.
He failed to prepare his face for the position in which he stood before his wife after the discovery of his guilt.
Instead of being offended, denying, making excuses, asking for forgiveness, even remaining indifferent - everything would be better than what he did!
His face quite involuntarily ("reflexes of the brain," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, who loved physiology), quite involuntarily suddenly smiled his habitual, kind, and therefore stupid smile.
He couldn't forgive himself for that stupid smile.
Seeing this smile, Dolly shuddered, as if from physical pain, burst out, with her characteristic vehemence, a stream of cruel words, and ran out of the room.
Since then, she did not want to see her husband.
"That stupid smile is to blame for everything," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch.
“But what to do?
what to do? he said to himself in despair, and found no answer.